So in the previous lecture,
we installed Flutter X code and Android studio,
and we made sure that all these tools
are set up and configured.
Now we wanna create our first Flutter app
and run it on one of these emulators.
And for this, you should, first of all,
go into a folder in your terminal here
where you wanna create and store that Flutter project.
You can use the CD command for Dart to navigate around.
And here in my case, I will go into a playground folder,
which sits in a global development folder,
but you can create and use any folder structure you want,
move into that folder here in your terminal,
and that's really important because the path
into which you moved here
will be used for storing that Flutter project
that we are about to create.
And therefore once you switched to the appropriate folder,
you can then run Flutter create
to create a new Flutter project.
You also need to give that project a name,
and I'll name at first-app, but the name is up to you.
And then once you run this command,
a new folder with that name, first step in my case
will be created in the path
into which you navigated before.
No here I'll hit Enter
and this one now quickly create this project.
Now we also see two commands here,
which we could now use to already start our Flutter app
assuming that we do have an emulator up and running.
But I actually don't wanna do this right away.
Instead, I now wanna install an extra tool,
which we will use for writing our code.
We could use Android Studio for that,
but Android Studio is quite heavy and a bit slow
and I personally don't like it too much.
So my personal preference is a different tool,
and that tool is called Visual Studio Code,
which is a free IDE, a free development environment
provided by Microsoft,
which you can use for all kinds of programming languages
and Flutter and Dart are no exceptions.
So you can visit code.visualstudio.com
to download it from there.
It's a way liable for all operating systems
and your operating system
should be selected here by default.
So you can then download Visual Studio Code.
And once that download is finished,
simply install it by opening that downloaded file
and following the instructions here,
it's really straight forward.
Once you did install it, you can open it
and you should see a starting screen
that looks something like that.
The exact look might differ over time,
but it should look something like that.
Now here I have this dark look and you can get this as well
by going to the menu, and then there under code,
preferences, color theme, you can choose the color theme.
And I'm using that dark plus theme,
but you can of course try out different themes here.
But I like this a lot.
The great thing about Visual Studio Code
is also that you can install a lot of extensions there
which make your life easier.
And there are a couple of extensions
which I'm using in this course,
which you absolutely should install as well.
And for that you can go to this extensions part here
in that sidebar or by using that shortcut
or by using view, extensions,
and then here, the first extension you need
is the Flutter extension.
So search for Flutter and then make sure
you installed that extension.
That's an extension maintained
by the official Dart and Flutter team,
and it will make developing Flutter apps
with Visual studio code much, much easier.
So definitely install that.
That will then automatically also install another extension,
the Dart extension,
which you don't need to install separately
therefore, which also helps with writing Dart code.
And since Flutter uses Dart, this is also helpful.
Now I'll quickly reload here
since I'm prompted for that but that's now the first step.
And then there's one last extension,
which you can also install
and that's the material icon extension.
Now this is purely visual,
but I'm using it throughout this course.
It changes the file icons in our project.
So I will install it.
And then after installing it, choose adhere to set it.
And this is just cosmetics. It's not required.
But I like to look up the file icons this gives me.
Okay, now we've got all these extensions installed.
Now we can go here to the explorer and open a new folder,
open a new project into Visual studio code
so that we can edit it here.
And here I'm simply picking that first app folder,
which I created a second ago with Flutter create
and open that here in Visual studio code.
I'm opening the entire folder.
I'm not selecting the files in there,
but the entire folder and click open.
And this will now give me this project set up here.
Now the exact files and folders you might be getting
could differ a little bit over time,
but you should have a lib folder,
you should have an Android and an iOS folder
since we are on MacOS here.
You should have a test folder,
you should have a pubspec backward yaml file,
and then you are pretty much good to go.
Now since the exact folder structure
and also the starting project you get
can differ over time, attached you find my pubspec.yml file
and my main.dart file.
And you should use these attached files
to replace your main.dart file into lip folder with mine
and delete any other Dart files you might have in there
if you have more than just main.dart.
Delete anything else so that you have just a lip folder
with my attached main.dart file in there.
And replace your pubspec.yml file with mine
simply to make following along with this course
and this lecture much easier.
Now I will walk you through these folders and files
and what they do in the next course section.
So for the moment we'll just take them for granted
and ignore them.
I can say that the pubspec.yml file
is an important configuration file for our project
and the lib folder holds the main source code
for our project.
So instead lib folder
in which we will write our Flutter code.
But I don't wanna dive too much into that right now,
we'll do that in the next section,
instead I now wanna start this Flutter project
on an emulator
so that we can see this Flutter app in action.
And for this, what you can do is in Visual studio code,
go to terminal new terminal here,
to open your regular system terminal,
but integrated into this project here,
integrated into Visual studio code.
Which is good because that means you can have your code
and this terminal on the same screen.
And then here in this terminal, what you can do
to run this project is you can run Flutter run.
But, before you do that,
you need to make sure that you have an emulator
up and running.
And that could be the iOS emulator or the Android emulator.
Now here I'll go for the Android emulator
since I will use the Android emulator
for the majority of this course,
since a windows students can only build for Android
and hence I wanna use the emulator
all the students can use here.
You could also use iOS,
but if you're facing any problems there,
ignore them for now, later in the course
I will in detail again, show you how to configure X code
and run your Flutter app on a real iOS device
and on an iOS simulator.
So for the moment I'll use Android here.
And hence in Android studio, open that ABD manager,
as we learned it in the previous course lecture,
and then start that emulator that I created there again,
so that I have this Android emulator up and running,
which I use for testing my Android app,
my Flutter app on Android.
Here it is starting up.
Let me close this here.
And now that the Android emulator is up and running
for me here,
back here in Visual studio code in this integrated terminal,
we can run Flutter run.
And what this should do normally
is it should now convert this Flutter project
into an Android app and start it on the Android emulator.
It won't do that if you don't have an emulator
up and running,
then it might try to start this as a web application,
but we're not focusing on web applications in this course.
So really make sure you have your Android emulator
up and running.
Now, the first time you start this, it can take a while
because it's going through that complete build process.
It's converting your Flutter code to machine code
and building it as an Android app.
Under the hood it's using Android studio for that
and therefore the first time you run this,
this can take a while.
So let's be patient here
and wait for this startup process to finish.
And now it's installing that built app on the emulator.
So here on the emulator you see that something is happening.
And here we go now.
This now is running and you can tell that it's running
by the fact that I'm not getting any error here.
That I see a couple of commands, which I can use.
I'll come back to them later.
And that this process didn't finish.
I'm not back into the regular input mode again
instead we now have this running administration mode here
where we can administer the running application
and I'll come back to what I mean with that in a second.
If you have a look at the emulator,
you should see this output here
with that starting project I gave to you.
And here you got this button, which you can click.
And if you do click this button here,
you have this counter, that increments.
It might be a bit slow initially, but no worries
that's not Flutter in general,
but this emulator can be a bit slow
also depending on your hardware.
And since I'm recording my screen whilst using it,
it's especially not extremely fast.
But you shouldn't be able to interact here.
And this is now our first Flutter app
built as an Android app, running on an Android phone.
A virtual one but still an Android phone.
And the code for that app is here in main.dart.
Now again, we'll dive into that code and understand it
through out course, starting in the next core section.
But in the end here we have code
for rendering this user interface,
for rendering a couple of those so-called widgets
on this user interface, and for managing that counter.
Now what's nice about the development experience you get
with Flutter, is that after this initial start here,
you don't have to stop this running process
and run Flutter run again,
whenever you change anything in your code.
But instead you can make code changes and reload,
hot reload, as it's called,
that running application to see changes immediately.
For example, let's say here in line 58,
we wanna change counter
to set it equal to counter plus two.
You don't need to fully understand the code yet,
but what this will do is it will make sure
that whenever we click the button,
the counter is not incremented by one,
but instead increased by two.
If you do that and you save the file
by pressing command safe or using file safe,
then right now, it still increments by one
if I clicked the button.
But here in this terminal,
you see that we got a couple of commands we can issue.
And one of them is the hot reload command,
which simply means that our updated code
will be injected into this running app,
which is nice during development.
So by pressing R once it will perform that hot reload
and now you see I still have my old counter here,
but if I now click plus it's increased by two.
So that code change was injected into the running app
and that makes development super efficient
because we don't have to stop everything
and restart the entire app
just because we made one tiny code change.
Now if this breaks for some reason or doesn't work,
you can always also do a full restart
by pressing shift + R and then it will restart the app.
The counter will there for reset to zero here,
but you still don't need to quit the entire process
and run Flutter run again,
instead of just to restart at the app
based on the latest code now.
And that's how our development flow could look like
when using flutter run in the terminal.
But I'm saying could look like
because of with Visual studio code
and the flatter extension installed there,
we don't even have to use this approach.
Instead I'll quit this running process here
by pressing Ctrl + C here in that terminal.
And I'll close that terminal.
Instead of using Flutter run there, which you could,
I'm going to go to my menu here and then run.
And then here we can start debugging this app
or run it without debugging.
And that's what all do here.
I'll choose run without debugging.
And what this will do for me now here,
is it will again start this Flutter app on this emulator,
but it will execute Flutter run behind the scenes.
Now for you it might first of all prompt you
how you wanna run this application.
It might show a little dropdown
where you can then choose Dart as an option
or Flutter and Dart.
So choose that option if you are prompted to choose
how to execute this app, choose Dart and Flutter,
or just Dart in the dropdown you might be getting there.
Once this is running you also might get this popup
regarding the Dart dev tools
and here we'll dive into them later.
I'll choose not now for now.
Now we also got this terminal down there,
but it's actually not the same terminal as before.
It's just a debug console that locks some warnings
or some information messages to us that we might be getting.
But we now got this part here with some controls
that we can use to control the running app.
For example here, we got this flash,
which is now our hot reload button.
So instead of pressing R,
we can click this button to hot reload.
But we don't even have to do that
if I change my code and save this,
this will actually be issued automatically.
So now Flutter will watch my code changes here
and whenever I save my code after changing it,
it will automatically trigger a hot reload.
So then I automatically get this new code in effect here.
So we could manually trigger it by clicking the flash,
but we don't have to.
If we wanna do a full hot restart,
we can click this green arrow here and then do that restart,
which we previously did by pressing shift + R.
And if we're done for the moment,
we can press this stop icon to stop running this,
and then it will terminate this.
We can close this console and we can always rerun by again,
choosing run, run without debugging.
So that's how we will now manage and run this Flutter app
for the rest of this course,
since this simply is a bit more convenient
than having to use Flutter run
and having to hot reload manually.
That's why I'm using
this FlUtter extension driven approach instead.
Now with that we have the development set up we need
for MacOS for building Flutter projects
as apps for iOS and Android.
And then for now and the next lectures
I'll show the same approach for windows.
Of course, you can skip that if you are only using MacOS
and then in the next core section,
I will then dive into that code a bit more,
and we're going to learn how Flutter and Dart
works from the ground up.
Before we do that though, in the next lectures,
after the windows set up,
I'll walk you through what you can expect from the course,
and through other aspects of working with Flutter as well.